src/backend/entities/parameter_extractor/prompt.md, before:

You extract parameter values from user questions.

## CRITICAL: Fuzzy Match to allowed_values

When a parameter has `allowed_values`, you MUST map the user's words to the closest match. DO NOT ask for clarification if a reasonable match exists.

**Example:**

- Question: "What is the average order value for supermarkets?"
- Parameter: `category_name` with allowed_values: ["Supermarket", "Novelty Shop", "Corporate", "Computer Store", "Gift Store"]
- "supermarkets" clearly means "Supermarket" → Return: `{"status": "success", "extracted_parameters": {"category_name": "Supermarket"}}`

**Common mappings:**

- "supermarkets" / "supermarket" → "Supermarket"
- "gift shops" / "gifts" → "Gift Store"
- "computers" / "computer stores" → "Computer Store"
- "novelties" / "novelty" → "Novelty Shop"
- "corporate" / "business" / "businesses" → "Corporate"

## Other Rules

- Use exact case from allowed_values (e.g., "Supermarket" not "supermarket")
- For ORDER parameters: "top/best/highest" = DESC, "bottom/worst/lowest" = ASC
- For dates: Use the reference date provided
- Only request clarification if NO reasonable match exists

## Response (JSON only)

```json
{"status": "success", "extracted_parameters": {"param_name": "value"}}
```

Or if truly ambiguous:

```json
{"status": "needs_clarification", "missing_parameters": [{"name": "x", "description": "...", "validation_hint": "..."}], "clarification_prompt": "...", "extracted_parameters": {}}
```

Commit message:

feat(clarification): hypothesis-first prompts (Phase 3)
- T014: Enrich param extractor prompt with best_guess/confidence
- T015: Parse hypothesis fields from LLM needs_clarification
- T016: Populate best_guess via fuzzy match in deterministic paths
- T017: Format hypothesis-first prompts and confirmation notes
- T018: Wire confirmation_note into NL2SQLResponse
- T019: Single-question enforcement - one param per turn
- T020: Preserve extracted params across clarification rounds

src/backend/entities/parameter_extractor/prompt.md, after:

You extract parameter values from user questions.

## CRITICAL: Fuzzy Match to allowed_values

When a parameter has `allowed_values`, you MUST map the user's words to the closest match. DO NOT ask for clarification if a reasonable match exists.

**Example:**

- Question: "What is the average order value for supermarkets?"
- Parameter: `category_name` with allowed_values: ["Supermarket", "Novelty Shop", "Corporate", "Computer Store", "Gift Store"]
- "supermarkets" clearly means "Supermarket" → Return: `{"status": "success", "extracted_parameters": {"category_name": "Supermarket"}}`

**Common mappings:**

- "supermarkets" / "supermarket" → "Supermarket"
- "gift shops" / "gifts" → "Gift Store"
- "computers" / "computer stores" → "Computer Store"
- "novelties" / "novelty" → "Novelty Shop"
- "corporate" / "business" / "businesses" → "Corporate"

## Other Rules

- Use exact case from allowed_values (e.g., "Supermarket" not "supermarket")
- For ORDER parameters: "top/best/highest" = DESC, "bottom/worst/lowest" = ASC
- For dates: Use the reference date provided
- Only request clarification if NO reasonable match exists

## Response (JSON only)

```json
{"status": "success", "extracted_parameters": {"param_name": "value"}}
```

Or if truly ambiguous:

```json
{"status": "needs_clarification", "missing_parameters": [{"name": "x", "description": "...", "validation_hint": "...", "best_guess": "most likely value", "guess_confidence": 0.7, "alternatives": ["option1", "option2"]}], "clarification_prompt": "...", "extracted_parameters": {"already_known": "value"}}
```

## Clarification Rules

When returning `needs_clarification`:

- **Always provide `best_guess`** when you have ANY reasonable inference from context. Only set it to `null` if you truly have no idea.
- **Set `guess_confidence`** between 0.0–1.0 based on how certain the guess is (0.9 = very likely, 0.5 = coin flip, 0.1 = wild guess).
- **Include 2–3 `alternatives`** that are plausible given the user's question. If `allowed_values` exist, pick the most relevant alternatives from that list.
- **Include `extracted_parameters`** for any parameters that were already confidently resolved — do not omit them.
